		**TOEM SHELL**

A shell program is an application that allows interacting with the computer. In a shell the user can run programs and also redirect the input to come from a file and output to come from a file. Shells also provide programming constructions such as if, for, while, functions, variables etc. Additionally, shell programs offer features such as line editing, history, file completion, wildcards, environment variable expansion, and programing constructions. Here is a list of the most popular shell programs in UNIX:

sh - Shell Program: The original shell program in UNIX.
csh - C Shell: An improved version of sh.
tcsh - A version of Csh that has line editing.
ksh - Korn Shell: The father of all advanced shells.
bash - The GNU shell: Takes the best of all shell programs. It is currently the most common shell program.

The shell implementation is divided into three parts:
The Parser
The Executor; and
Shell Subsystems

The Parser
The Parser is the software component that reads the command line such as “ls al”
and puts it into a data structure called Command Table that will store the commands that will be executed.

The Executor
The executor will take the command table generated by the parser and for every
Simple Command in the array it will create a new process. It will also if necessary create pipes to communicate the output of one process to the input of the next one. Additionally, it will redirect the standard input, standard output, and standard error if there are any redirections

Shell Subsystems
Other subsystems that complete our shell are:
● Environment Variables: Expressions of the form ${VAR} are expanded with the
corresponding environment variable. Also the shell should be able to set, expand and print environment vars.
● Wildcards: Arguments of the form a*a are expanded to all the files that match them in the local directory and in multiple directories .
● Subshells: Arguments between `` (backticks) are executed and the output is sent as input to the shell.

To get TOEMASH working we highly recommend you clone this repo and compile all the .c files in your terminal. To compile use gcc -Wall -Werror -Wextra -pedantic -std=gnu89 *.c -o toemash
and then run the executable as thus: ./toemash

### Environment :deciduous_tree:

Upon invocation, **toemash** receives and copies the environment of the parent process in which it was executed. This environment is an array of *name-value* strings describing variables in the format *NAME=VALUE*. A few key environmental variables are:

#### HOME
The home directory of the current user and the default directory argument for the **cd** builtin command.

```
$ echo "echo $HOME" | ./toemash
/home/vagrant
```

#### PWD
The current working directory as set by the **cd** command.

```
$ echo "echo $PWD" | ./toemash
/home/vagrant/ALX/simple_shell
```

#### OLDPWD
The previous working directory as set by the **cd** command.

```
$ echo "echo $OLDPWD" | ./toemash
/home/vagrant/ALX/printf
```

#### PATH
A colon-separated list of directories in which the shell looks for commands. A null directory name in the path (represented by any of two adjacent colons, an initial colon, or a trailing colon) indicates the current directory.

```
$ echo "echo $PATH" | ./toemash
/home/vagrant/.cargo/bin:/home/vagrant/.local/bin:/home/vagrant/.rbenv/plugins/ruby-build/bin:/home/vagrant/.rbenv/shims:/home/vagrant/.rbenv/bin:/home/vagrant/.nvm/versions/node/v10.15.3/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:/home/vagrant/.cargo/bin:/home/vagrant/workflow:/home/vagrant/.local/bin
```

### Command Execution :thumbsup:

After receiving a command, **toemash** tokenizes it into words using `" "` as a delimiter. The first word is considered the command and all remaining words are considered arguments to that command. **toemash** then proceeds with the following actions:

1. If the first character of the command is neither a slash (`\`) nor dot (`.`), the shell searches for it in the list of shell builtins. If there exists a builtin by that name, the builtin is invoked.
2. If the first character of the command is none of a slash (`\`), dot (`.`), nor builtin, **toemash** searches each element of the **PATH** environmental variable for a directory containing an executable file by that name.
3. If the first character of the command is a slash (`\`) or dot (`.`) or either of the above searches was successful, the shell executes the named program with any remaining given arguments in a separate execution environment.

### Exit Status :wave:

**toemash** returns the exit status of the last command executed, with zero indicating success and non-zero indicating failure.

If a command is not found, the return status is `127`; if a command is found but is not executable, the return status is 126.

All builtins return zero on success and one or two on incorrect usage (indicated by a corresponding error message).

### Signals :exclamation:

While running in interactive mode, **toemash** ignores the keyboard input `Ctrl+c`. Alternatively, an input of end-of-file (`Ctrl+d`) will exit the program.

User hits `Ctrl+d` in the third line.
```
$ ./toemash
$ ^C
$ ^C
$
```

### Variable Replacement :heavy_dollar_sign:

**toemash** interprets the `$` character for variable replacement.

#### $ENV_VARIABLE
`ENV_VARIABLE` is substituted with its value.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $PWD" | ./toemash
/home/vagrant/ALX/simple_shell
```

#### $?
`?` is substitued with the return value of the last program executed.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $?" | ./toemash
0
```

#### $$
The second `$` is substitued with the current process ID.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo $$" | ./toemash
6494
```

### Comments :

**toemash** ignores all words and characters preceeded by a `#` character on a line.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo 'hello' #this will be ignored!" | ./toemash
'hello'
```

### Operators :

**toemash** specially interprets the following operator characters:

#### ; - Command separator
Commands separated by a `;` are executed sequentially.

Example:
```
$ echo "echo 'hello' ; echo 'world'" | ./toemash
'hello'
'world'
```

#### && - AND logical operator
`command1 && command2`: `command2` is executed if, and only if, `command1` returns an exit status of zero.

Example:
```
$ echo "error! && echo 'hello'" | ./toemash
./toemash: 1: error!: not found
$ echo "echo 'all good' && echo 'hello'" | ./toemash
'all good'
'hello'
```

#### || - OR logical operator
`command1 || command2`: `command2` is executed if, and only if, `command1` returns a non-zero exit status.

Example:
```
$ echo "error! || echo 'but still runs'" | ./toemash
./toemash: 1: error!: not found
'but still runs'
```

The operators `&&` and `||` have equal precedence, followed by `;`.

### toemash Builtin Commands:

#### cd
  * Usage: `cd [DIRECTORY]`
  * Changes the current directory of the process to `DIRECTORY`.
  * If no argument is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $HOME`.
  * If the argument `-` is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $OLDPWD` and the pathname of the new working directory is printed to standad output.
  * If the argument, `--` is given, the command is interpreted as `cd $OLDPWD` but the pathname of the new working directory is not printed.
  * The environment variables `PWD` and `OLDPWD` are updated after a change of directory.

Example:
```
$ ./toemash
$ pwd
/home/vagrant/ALX/simple_shell
$ cd ../
$ pwd
/home/vagrant/ALX
$ cd -
$ pwd
/home/vagrant/ALX/simple_shell
```

#### alias
  * Usage: `alias [NAME[='VALUE'] ...]`
  * Handles aliases.
  * `alias`: Prints a list of all aliases, one per line, in the form `NAME='VALUE'`.
  * `alias NAME [NAME2 ...]`: Prints the aliases `NAME`, `NAME2`, etc. one per line, in the form `NAME='VALUE'`.
  * `alias NAME='VALUE' [...]`: Defines an alias for each `NAME` whose `VALUE` is given. If `name` is already an alias, its value is replaced with `VALUE`.

Example:
```
$ ./toemash
$ alias show=ls
$ show
AUTHORS            builtins_help_2.c  errors.c         linkedlist.c        shell.h       test
README.md          env_builtins.c     getline.c        locate.c            shellex
alias_builtins.c   environ.c          helper.c         main.c              split.c
builtin.c          err_msgs1.c        helpers_2.c      man_simple_shell  str_funcs1.c
builtins_help_1.c  err_msgs2.c        input_helpers.c  proc_file_comm.c    str_funcs2.c
```

#### exit
  * Usage: `exit [STATUS]`
  * Exits the shell.
  * The `STATUS` argument is the integer used to exit the shell.
  * If no argument is given, the command is interpreted as `exit 0`.

Example:
```
$ ./toemash
$ exit
```

#### env
  * Usage: `env`
  * Prints the current environment.

Example:
```
$ ./shellex
$ env
NVM_DIR=/home/vagrant/.nvm
...
```

#### setenv
  * Usage: `setenv [VARIABLE] [VALUE]`
  * Initializes a new environment variable, or modifies an existing one.
  * Upon failure, prints a message to `stderr`.

Example:
```
$ ./toemash
$ setenv NAME Poppy
$ echo $NAME
Poppy
```

#### unsetenv
  * Usage: `unsetenv [VARIABLE]`
  * Removes an environmental variable.
  * Upon failure, prints a message to `stderr`.

Example:
```
$ ./toemash
$ setenv NAME Poppy
$ unsetenv NAME
$ echo $NAME
$
```


		**CONTRIBUTORS**
		Emmanuel Chukwujekwu [github] (https:/github.com/EmmanuelPriest)
		Anthony Ekim [github] (https://github.com/Tonyekim)
